feat: support expression in window aggregate bounds (#1105)
substrait-io/substrait: site/docs/expressions/window_functions.md

| Partition   | A list of partitioning expressions.                          | False, defaults to a single partition for the entire dataset |
| Lower Bound | Preceding, Following, CurrentRow, or Unbounded.               | False, defaults to start of partition                        |
| Upper Bound | Preceding, Following, CurrentRow, or Unbounded.               | False, defaults to end of partition                          |

`Preceding` and `Following` define offsets relative to the current record and with respect to the declared ordering. `Preceding` moves toward records or values earlier in that ordering, while `Following` moves toward records or values later in that ordering. They therefore apply in opposite value directions for ascending and descending sorts:

| Sort direction | `Preceding` boundary              | `Following` boundary            |
| -------------- | --------------------------------- | ------------------------------- |
| Ascending      | Toward lower ordering values      | Toward higher ordering values   |
| Descending     | Toward higher ordering values     | Toward lower ordering values    |

The interpretation of an offset depends on `BoundsType`:

> * `BOUNDS_TYPE_ROWS` defines physical row offsets in the declared ordering. `offset_expr` must evaluate to a strictly positive integer number of rows; `int64` is the recommended type.

Reviewer: Matching the `int64` mandate and the no-declared-ordering case:

```suggestion
* `BOUNDS_TYPE_ROWS` defines physical row offsets in the declared ordering. `offset_expr` must evaluate to a strictly positive number of rows and must have type `int64`. If no ordering is declared, the row order is implementation-defined.
```

> * `BOUNDS_TYPE_RANGE` defines value offsets from the current row's ordering value and requires exactly one ordering expression. `offset_expr` must evaluate to a strictly positive distance compatible with that ordering expression. A range boundary is inclusive.

Reviewer: Making "compatible" concrete, and carrying the per-direction formula that the old `current_value ± bound` wording got wrong for descending sorts:

```suggestion
* `BOUNDS_TYPE_RANGE` defines value offsets from the current row's ordering value and requires exactly one ordering expression. `offset_expr` must evaluate to a strictly positive distance whose type `D` is compatible with the ordering expression's type `T` — that is, `add(T, D) -> T` and `subtract(T, D) -> T` must be defined (for example `timestamp`/`interval_day`, `decimal`/`decimal`, `i64`/`i64`). For a `Preceding` bound the boundary value is `subtract(current, offset)` under an ascending ordering and `add(current, offset)` under a descending ordering; `Following` is the mirror. A range boundary is inclusive.
```

> `offset_expr` is the recommended way to specify an offset. A literal integer `offset` is still accepted for compatibility but is deprecated. Evaluating `offset_expr` to null, zero, or a negative value should result in an error. Use `CurrentRow` for zero and the opposite bound direction for a negative distance.

Reviewer: Folding in the removal timeline, the at-least-one rule with the dual-write allowance, the evaluation context, and zero-as-`CurrentRow`:

```suggestion
`offset_expr` is the recommended way to specify an offset. A literal integer `offset` is still accepted for compatibility but is deprecated and will be removed in a future release. At least one of the two must be set; consumers must use `offset_expr` when it is set and ignore `offset`. During migration a producer may set both, with `offset` carrying the int64-literal equivalent — possible only for `BOUNDS_TYPE_ROWS` with a literal offset — so that consumers which do not yet read `offset_expr` can still execute the plan.

`offset_expr` is evaluated once per input record and may reference the input's fields, but must not contain window or aggregate functions. Evaluating it to null or a negative value should result in an error; evaluating it to zero is equivalent to `CurrentRow`.
```

| Upper Bound | Preceding, Following, CurrentRow, or Unbounded.               | False, defaults to end of partition                          |

`Preceding` and `Following` define offsets relative to the current record and with respect to the declared ordering. `Preceding` moves toward records or values earlier in that ordering, while `Following` moves toward records or values later in that ordering. They therefore apply in opposite value directions for ascending and descending sorts:

| Sort direction | `Preceding` boundary              | `Following` boundary            |
| -------------- | --------------------------------- | ------------------------------- |
| Ascending      | Toward lower ordering values      | Toward higher ordering values   |
| Descending     | Toward higher ordering values     | Toward lower ordering values    |

The interpretation of an offset depends on `BoundsType`:

* `BOUNDS_TYPE_ROWS` defines physical row offsets in the declared ordering. `offset_expr` must evaluate to a strictly positive number of rows and must have type `int64`. If no ordering is declared, the row order is implementation-defined.

> * `BOUNDS_TYPE_RANGE` defines value offsets from the current row's ordering value and requires exactly one ordering expression. `offset_expr` must evaluate to a strictly positive distance whose type `D` is compatible with the ordering expression's type `T` — that is, `add(T, D) -> T` and `subtract(T, D) -> T` must be defined (for example `timestamp`/`interval_day`, `decimal`/`decimal`, `i64`/`i64`). For a `Preceding` bound the boundary value is `subtract(current, offset)` under an ascending ordering and `add(current, offset)` under a descending ordering; `Following` is the mirror. A range boundary is inclusive.

Reviewer: Nit: the two formulas say `offset`, which now reads as the deprecated int64 field. The subject of the sentence is `offset_expr`.

```suggestion
* `BOUNDS_TYPE_RANGE` defines value offsets from the current row's ordering value and requires exactly one ordering expression. `offset_expr` must evaluate to a strictly positive distance whose type `D` is compatible with the ordering expression's type `T` — that is, `add(T, D) -> T` and `subtract(T, D) -> T` must be defined (for example `timestamp`/`interval_day`, `decimal`/`decimal`, `i64`/`i64`). For a `Preceding` bound the boundary value is `subtract(current, offset_expr)` under an ascending ordering and `add(current, offset_expr)` under a descending ordering; `Following` is the mirror. A range boundary is inclusive.
```

> `offset_expr` is the recommended way to specify an offset. A literal integer `offset` is still accepted for compatibility but is deprecated and will be removed in a future release. At least one of the two must be set; consumers must use `offset_expr` when it is set and ignore `offset`. During migration a producer may set both, with `offset` carrying the int64-literal equivalent — possible only for `BOUNDS_TYPE_ROWS` with a literal offset — so that consumers which do not yet read `offset_expr` can still execute the plan.

Reviewer: Matching the proto change: the dual-write condition is about the distance being a positive int64 literal, not about `BOUNDS_TYPE_ROWS` (RANGE with an integer distance was expressible via `offset` before this PR). Plus the same presence clarifier, so the prose and the proto comment state the same rule.

```suggestion
`offset_expr` is the recommended way to specify an offset. A literal integer `offset` is still accepted for compatibility but is deprecated and will be removed in a future release. At least one of the two must be set; because `offset` has no explicit presence it is considered set when it is non-zero, and zero was never a valid offset. Consumers must use `offset_expr` when it is set and ignore `offset`. During migration a producer may set both, with `offset` carrying the int64-literal equivalent — possible only when the distance is a positive int64 literal — so that consumers which do not yet read `offset_expr` can still execute the plan.
```

| Partition   | A list of partitioning expressions.                          | False, defaults to a single partition for the entire dataset |
| Lower Bound | Preceding, Following, CurrentRow, or Unbounded.               | False, defaults to start of partition                        |
| Upper Bound | Preceding, Following, CurrentRow, or Unbounded.               | False, defaults to end of partition                          |

`Preceding` and `Following` define offsets relative to the current record and with respect to the declared ordering. `Preceding` moves toward records or values earlier in that ordering, while `Following` moves toward records or values later in that ordering. They therefore apply in opposite value directions for ascending and descending sorts:

| Sort direction | `Preceding` boundary              | `Following` boundary            |
| -------------- | --------------------------------- | ------------------------------- |
| Ascending      | Toward lower ordering values      | Toward higher ordering values   |
| Descending     | Toward higher ordering values     | Toward lower ordering values    |

The interpretation of an offset depends on `BoundsType`:

> * `BOUNDS_TYPE_ROWS` defines physical row offsets in the declared ordering. `offset_expr` must evaluate to a non-negative number of rows and must have type `int64`. If no ordering is declared, no row order is guaranteed.

Reviewer 2: meta: Not for this PR, but thinking about future work to add `BOUNDS_TYPE_GROUP` I think it would be good to rework this section to something like
```
# Bound Modes
The three bounds mode (ROWS, RANGE, GROUP) impose the following restrictions on other aspects of window functions settings
## ROWS
<All ROWS invariants>

## RANGE
<All range invariants>

## GROUP
<All group invariants> 
```

I would then suggest referencing this suggestion from the protos, and reducing the documentation on the protos directly, because the fields in the protobufs are not necessarily grouped in a way to make it possible to really highlight the invariants in one place.

Reviewer 3: ➕

Reviewer: +1. It would also give the cross-field invariants a single home.

This and @benbellick's [suggestion](https://github.com/substrait-io/substrait/pull/1105#discussion_r3787013974) on ConsistentPartitionWindowRel.bounds_type are alternatives rather than complements, though.

One thing worth carrying over whichever way it goes: the per-mode invariants are only half of it. The other half is what a consumer must do when the mode isn't set, which is where the implementations actually diverge today — substrait-java rejects, DuckDB assumes RANGE, DataFusion infers from sorts.

Author: It is a complex piece so better to clearly describe the model, invariants, and what to do and not to do in a doc. I have a strong preference to one definition or one source of truth. This, clearly, one doc is better than copy and pasting the doc around and go stale.

At least this PR prescribes the necessary components as a spec, so I'll create a follow up issue to properly document the concept, invariants, and what to do/not to.

Author: #1182

Producers must set `BoundsType` to `BOUNDS_TYPE_ROWS` or `BOUNDS_TYPE_RANGE` when either bound is `CurrentRow`, `Preceding`, or `Following`. Consumers must reject such plans when `BoundsType` is `BOUNDS_TYPE_UNSPECIFIED` rather than assume a bounds type. `CurrentRow` identifies the current record for ROWS bounds and the current peer group, whose records have equal sort key values, for RANGE bounds; two null sort key values are considered equal. Bounds are inclusive. Contradictory lower and upper bounds produce an empty frame, and the window function follows its empty-frame semantics, such as `SUM` yielding null and `COUNT(*)` yielding zero.

> `offset_expr` is the recommended way to specify an offset. A strictly positive literal integer `offset` is still accepted for compatibility but is deprecated and will be removed in a future release. At least one of the two must be set; because `offset` has no explicit presence it is considered set when it is non-zero, and zero was never a valid offset. Consumers must use `offset_expr` when it is set and ignore `offset`. During migration a producer may set both, with `offset` carrying the int64-literal equivalent — possible only when the distance is a positive int64 literal — so that consumers which do not yet read `offset_expr` can still execute the plan.

Reviewer 3: nit: I don't think we should have to specify how to do the migration for every field inside of the documentation. But to be able to do that, we probably should have a more formal migration policy. That can be left as a follow up, so this is okay for now.

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/substrait-io/substrait/pull/1181

> `offset_expr` may reference the input's fields and must behave as if evaluated once per input record, but it must not contain window or aggregate functions. A null or negative result is invalid; a zero result is equivalent to `CurrentRow`. Because `offset` cannot represent zero, producers should emit `CurrentRow` rather than a zero `offset_expr` so that the bound remains readable by consumers that do not yet support `offset_expr`.

Reviewer 2: > Because `offset` cannot represent zero, producers should emit `CurrentRow` rather than a zero `offset_expr`

I would make a stronger case here and say the `CurrentRow` MUST be used to represent a zero-offset.

Reviewer 3: ➕

Reviewer: Agree on MUST, with one qualifier. offset_expr may reference the input's fields and is evaluated per record, so a producer cannot statically know that a non-literal expression will come out zero — a blanket MUST isn't satisfiable in that case. Splitting the static case from the runtime one:

```suggestion
`offset_expr` may reference the input's fields and must behave as if evaluated once per input record, but it must not contain window or aggregate functions. A null or negative result is invalid. A statically-known zero offset must be expressed as `CurrentRow` rather than as a zero `offset_expr`; `offset` cannot represent zero either way, so this also keeps the bound readable by consumers that do not yet support `offset_expr`. When a non-literal `offset_expr` evaluates to zero for a record, the bound is equivalent to `CurrentRow` for that record.
```

from my 🤖 review assistant
